---
layout: post
title:  "CS2040 Graph Summary Notes"
date:   2021-03-25
excerpt: ":)"
tag:
- java
- notes
---
# Graph revision

## Basics

Graph consists of
- nodes/ vertices (V)
- edges (E)

### Types of graph
- hypergraph: each edge connects >= 2 nodes, each edge is unique. Contains at least one node.
- multigraph: Contains at least one node, each edge connects two nodes, two nodes may be connected by more than one edge

Graph G = <V,E>

### Terminology

Degree of a node : number of adjacent edges.

Degree of a graph : max number of adjacent edges.

Diameter: max distance between two ndoes, following the shortest path

### Special graph

|          | Star | Clique/Complete Graph | Line/Path | Cycle        | Bipartite Graph |
| -------- | ---- |:---------------------:| --------- | ------------ | --------------- |
| Diameter | 2    |           1           | n-1       | n/2 or n/2-1 | Max: n-1        |
| Degree   | n-1  |          n-1          | 2         | 2            | 2               |

#### Bipartite Graph
Nodes divided into two sets, with no edges between nodes in the same set.

Max diameter: n-1
In cycle, count no of nodes -> even yes, odd not a bipartite

## Representing a graph

### Adjacency List
Graph consists of nodes + edges

- Nodes: stored in an array
- Edges: linked list per node

### Adjacency Matrix
- Nodes
- Edges: pairs of nodes

**A[v][w] = 1 iff (v,w) subset of E**
**A^2 = length 2 paths**

### Adj List VS Adj Matrix

**Using Adj List:**

for a graph G = (V,E)
- array of size V
- linked list of size E
- total: O(V + E)
- cycle: O(V)
- clique: O(V^2)

**Using Adj Matrix:**
- array of size V^2
- total: O(V^2)
- cycle: O(V^2)
- clique: O(V^2)

Rule: If the graph is **dense**, using adjacent matrix or else use adjacent list

dense: E = theta(V^2)

- What is the worst time complexity of checking node u and v are directly connected by an edge in a graph G = (V, E) when adjacency list is used:
    -  **O(min(V, E))**

|            |                    Adjacency Matrix                     | Adjacency List                                     |
| ---------- |:-------------------------------------------------------:| -------------------------------------------------- |
| fast query |                   are v,w neighbours                    | find me any neighbours && enumerate all neighbours |
| slow query | find me any neighbour of v &&  enumerate all neighbours | are v,w neighbours                                 |

## Searhcing a graph

### Breadth-first search
#### Concept
- Explore level by level
- Frontier: current level
- Initially: {S}
- Advance Frontier
- Dont backtrack
- Find sahortest path

#### Code implementation
- Build levels
- Calculate `level[i]` from `level[i-1]`
- Skip visited nodes

```java
BFS(Node[] nodeList, int startId) {
    boolean[] visited = new boolean[nodeList.length];
    Arrays.fill(visited, false);
    int[] parent = new int[nodelist.length];
    Arrays.fill(parent, -1);

    for (int start = 0; start < nodeList.length; start++) {
        if (!visited[start]){
            // Main code goes here!
            Collection<Integer> frontier = new Collection<Integer>;
            frontier.add(startId);

            while (!frontier.isEmpty()){
                Collection<Integer> nextFrontier = new … ;
                for (Integer v : frontier) {
                    for (Integer w : nodeList[v].nbrList) {
                        if (!visited[w]) {
                            visited[w] = true;
                            parent[w] = v;
                            nextFrontier.add(w);
                        }
                    }
                }
                frontier = nextFrontier;
            }
        }
    }
}
```


#### Analysis
> When does BFS failed to visit every node?
- when the graph has two components

> Running time using adjacency List: **O(V+E)**
- Vertex v = "start" once ==> O(V)
- Vertex v add to nextFrontier once ==> O(V)
    - after added never re-added
- Each v.nbrList is enumerated once. ==> O(E)
    - when v is removed from frontier

- BFS always run in O(V^2) on a complete graph as O(V+E) --> O(V^2) in a clique
> using an adjacency matrix: **O(V^2)**

#### Shortest Path
- Parent pointers store the shortest path
- Shortest path is a tree
- (Possibly high degrees; possibly high diameter)

#### Applications
> [Source of applications](https://cp-algorithms.com/graph/breadth-first-search.html#:~:text=As%20a%20result%20of%20how,is%20the%20number%20of%20edges.)

### Depth-First Search

#### Concept
- Follow path until get struck
- Backtrack until find a new node that is not struck
- recursively explore it
- Dont repeat a vertex

#### Code
```java
DFS-visit(Node[] nodeList, boolean[] visited, int startId){
    for (Integer v : nodeList[startId].nbrList) {
        if (!visited[v]) {
            visited[v] = true;
            DFS-visit(nodeList, visited, v);
        }
    }
}

DFS(Node[] nodeList){
    boolean[] visited = new boolean[nodeList.length];
    Arrays.fill(visited, false);
    for (start = i; start<nodeList.length; start++) {
        if (!visited[start]){
            visited[start] = true;
            DFS-visit(nodeList, visited, start);
        }
    }
}
```

#### Analysis

> DFS parent graph is a Tree.
DFS does not contain the shortest path.

> Running time of DFS is `O(V+E)` using Adj List.

- DFS visit called once per node ==> O(V)
- In one DFS visit, each neighbour is enumerated ==> O(E) in total

> Running time of DFS is `O(V^2)` using Adj Matrix.

- DFS visit called once per node ==> O(V)
- In one DFS visit, each neighbour is enumerated ==> O(V) per node


### BFS + DFS

using same algorithm

BFS -> queue
- Add start node to queue
- Repeat until queue is empty
    - Remove node v from front of queue
    - visit v
    - explore v
    - add unvisited neighbours to queue

DFS -> stack
- Add start node to stack
- Repeat until stack is empty
    - Pop node v from front of the stack
    - visit v
    - explore v
    - push all unvisited neighbours of v to front of stack

**DFS + BFS: visited every node and edge but not every path!**

## Shortest Paths for Direted Graph

### Bellman-Ford

#### Code
```java
n = V.length;
for (i=0; i<n; i++)
    for (Edge e : graph)
        relax(e)
```

#### Analysis
> When to stop early
- When an entire sequencce of E relax operations have no effect.

> Running Time:
- O(EV)
> Negative weights:
- No issues, but negative weight cycle cannot
> Detect negative weights cycles:
- Run bell-man ford for v+1 iterations, if last iteration has changes -> negative weight cycle
> if all same weight -> Use bfs

### Dijkstra

#### Concept
- Maintain distance estimate for every node
- begin with shortest-path-tree
- relax all outgoing edges

#### Code
```java
public Dijkstra{
    private Graph G;
    private IPriorityQueue pq = new PriQueue();
    private double[] distTo;
    searchPath(int start) {
        pq.insert(start, 0.0);
        distTo = new double[G.size()];
        Arrays.fill(distTo, INFTY);
        distTo[start] = 0;
        while (!pq.isEmpty()) {
            int w = pq.deleteMin();
            for (Edge e : G[w].nbrList)
                relax(e);
        }
    }

    relax(Edge e) {
        int v = e.from();
        int w = e.to();
        double weight = e.weight();
        if (distTo[w] > distTo[v] + weight) {
            distTo[w] = distTo[v] + weight;
            parent[w] = v;
        if (pq.contains(w))
            pq.decreaseKey(w, distTo[w]);
        else
            pq.insert(w, distTo[w]);
        }
    }
}
```

#### Analysis
> AVL tree for priority queue
- insert, deletemin, decreasekey, contain
- logn , logn, logn, 1
> Running time:
- O(E log v)
- edge is relaxed once, node is added to pq once
- O((V+E)log V) = O(E log V)

> Can we stop as soon as we dequeue the dest
- yes. A vertex is finished when it is dequeued.
> No negative weights and No reweight!

## Directed Graph

- Nodes
    - at least one
- Edges
    - each edge connects two nodes
    - each edge is unique
    - each edge is directed

### Topological order
1. Sequential total ordering of all nodes
2. Edges only point forward
3. Not every directed graph has such ordering
> MUST BE ACYCLIC

### DAG Topological Order using DFS
- Use DFS (post-order) to find
- process each node when it is last visited
#### Analysis
> Running time
- O(V+E)
> Unique?
- No

### Using Kahn's Algo

#### Concept
- Repeat:
- S = nodes in G that have no incoming edge
- Add nodes in S to topo-order
- remove all edges adj to nodes in S
- remove nodes in S from graph

#### Implementation
- Maintain all nodes in pq
- keys are incoming edges
- remove min-degree node u
- for each outgoing edge(u,v), decrease key of v by 1

#### Analysis
> Running time:
- O(E log V)

## Shortest Path for DAG
- topological sort
- relax in such order
> Running time
- O(E)
> Longest path?
- negate the weight and find shortest

## Shortest Path for Tree
- dfs / bfs
- relax each edge 1st time u see it
- O(V) time as there are only V edges in a tree.

## Minimum spanning tree
working on weighted, undirected graph
- Definition: a spanning tree is an acyclic subset
of the edges that connects all nodes
- A mimimum spanning tree is a spanning tree with minimum weights
- != shortest path
- cannot used to find shortest path
- a cut of a graph G=(V,E) is a partition of the vertices V into two disjoint subsets.
- an edge crosses a cut if it has one vertex in each of the two sets.

### Properties
1. No cycle
2. If you cut a mst, the two copies are both msts
3. (**Cycle property**) For every cycle, the maximum weight edge is not in mst
    3.5.  For every cycle, the minimum may/ may not in mst
4. (**Cut property**) For every partition of the nodes, the minimum weight edge across the cut is in the MST.

> For every vertex, the minimum outgoing edge is always part of the MST

### Algorithm to find
- Red rule: If C is a cycle with no red arcs, then color the max-weight edge in C red.
- Blue rule: If D is a cut with no blue arcs, then color the min-weight edge in D blue

General algo:
- Greedy algo -> repeat:    Apply red rule and blue rule

**Bad** algo:
1. If the number of vertices is 1, then return.
2. Divide the nodes into two sets.
3. Recursively calculate the MST of each set.
4. Find the lightest edge the connects the two sets and add it to the MST.
5. Return.

### Prim's algo
Basic idea:
- S : set of nodes connected by blue edges.
- Initially: S = {A}
- Repeat:
    - Identify cut: {S, V–S}
    - Find minimum weight edge on cut.
    - Add new node to S.

```java
// Initialize priority queue
PriorityQueue pq = new PriorityQueue();
for (Node v : G.V()) {
    pq.insert(v, INFTY);
}
pq.decreaseKey(start, 0);

// Initialize set S
HashSet<Node> S = new HashSet<Node>();
S.put(start);

// Initialize parent hash table
HashMap<Node,Node> parent = new HashMap<Node,Node>();
parent.put(start, null);

while (!pq.isEmpty()){
    Node v = pq.deleteMin();
    S.put(v);
    for each (Edge e : v.edgeList()){
        Node w = e.otherNode(v);
        if (!S.get(w)) {
            pq.decreaseKey(w, e.getWeight());
            parent.put(w, v);
        }
    }
}
```

#### Analysis
- O(E log V) using a binary heap (similar to dijkstra)

### Kruskal’s Algorithm

Basic idea:
- Sort edges by weight from smallest to biggest.
-  Consider edges in ascending order:
    - If both endpoints are in the same blue tree, then color the edge red.
    - Otherwise, color the edge blue.

Data structure:
- Union-Find
- Connect two nodes if they are in the same blue tree.

```java
// Sort edges and initialize
Edge[] sortedEdges = sort(G.E());
ArrayList<Edge> mstEdges = new ArrayList<Edge>();
UnionFind uf = new UnionFind(G.V());
// Iterate through all the edges, in order
for (int i=0; i<sortedEdges.length; i++) {
    Edge e = sortedEdges[i]; // get edge
    Node v = e.one(); // get node endpoints
    Node w = e.two();
    if (!uf.find(v,w)) { // in the same tree?
        mstEdges.add(e); // save edge
        uf.union(v,w); // combine trees
    }
}
```
#### Analysis
Performance:
- Sorting: O(E log E) = O(E log V)
- For E edges:
    - Find: O(α(n)) or O(log V)
    - Union: O(α(n)) or O(log V)

### Boruvka’s Algorithm
Initially:
- Create n connected components, one for each node in the graph.
=> For each node: O(V) store a component identifier.

One “Boruvka” Step:
- For each connected component, search for the minimum weight outgoing edge.
=> DFS or BFS: O(V + E) Check if edge connects two components.
Remember minimum cost edge connected to each component.
- Add selected edges.
- Merge connected components.
=> Scan every node: O(V) Compute new component ids. Update component ids. Mark added edges.

#### Analysis
Initially:
- n components

At each step:
- k components => k/2 components.

Termination:
- 1 component

Conclusion:
- At most O(log V) Boruvka steps.

Total time:
- O((E+V)log V) = O(E log V)

### variant

> what if all edges have same weight => O(E) => DFS/BFS
- A MST contains exactly (V-1) edges
- Every spanning tree contains (V-1) edges
- thus any spanning tree find by DFS/BFS is MST

> What if all the edges have weights from {1..10}?

Idea: Use an array of size 10
- Putting edges in array of linked lists: O(E)
- Iterating over all edges in ascending order: O(E)
- For each edge:
    - Checking whether to add an edge: O(a)
    - Union two components: O(a)
Total: O(aE)

> What if all the edges have weights from {1..10}?

Implement Priority Queue:
- Use an array of size 10 to implement
- Insert: put node in correct list O(V)
- Remove: lookup node (e.g., in hash table) and remove from liked list. O(V)
- ExtractMin: Remove from the minimum bucket.
- DecreaseKey: lookup node (e.g., in hash table) and move to correct liked list. O(E)
Total: O(E+V) = O(E)

### Directed MST
only those with one root:
- add minimum incoming edge
- O(E)
### Maximum S T
- Ok to re-weight
- OK to negative

### Steiner Tree
NP hard

**Algorithm SteinerMST:**
1. For every pair of required vertices (v,w), calculate the shortest path from (v to w).
- Use Dijkstra V times.
- Or All-Pairs-Shortest-Paths
2. Construct new graph on required nodes.
- V = required nodes
- E = shortest path distances
3. Run MST on new graph.
- Use Prim’s or Kruskal’s or Boruvka’s
- MST gives edges on new graph
4. Map new edges back to original graph.
- Use shortest path discovered in Step 1.
- Add these edges to Steiner MST.
- Remove duplicates.

O(T) < 2* OPT(G)


# Heap and Disjoint set

## Priority queue


| Operation    | Unsorted Array | Sorted Array | AVL tree     |
| --- | -------------- | ------------ | ---- |
|    insert |           O(1)     |      O(n)        |  O(logn)    |
|    extractMax | O(n)       | O(1)     | O(logn)|

## Using a Heap

### Concept
1. Heap ordering
    - priority[parent] >= priority[child]
2. Complete binary tree
    - Every level is full, except the last
    - All nodes are as far left as possible
> Max height
- Math.floor(log n)

### implementation
- insert:
    - add new leave
    - bubble up
- increase / decrease key:
    - update priority
    - bubble up / down ( left first when bubble down)
- delete:
    - swap(key, last)
    - remove(last)
    - bubble down
- removeMax:
    - delete(root)

### Analysis
- same O(cost) as avl
- faster real cost: no constant
- simpler: no rotations
- better concurrency

### Store in array
* root at slot 0
* left(x) = 2x + 1
* right(x) = 2x + 2
* parent(x) = floor((x-1)/2)

### Heap sort
- Unsorted list -> heap
- heap -> sorted list

#### STEP 1
- insert n times => O(n log n)
- Or by recursion => O(n)
    - start from complete tree
    - Base: each leaf is a heap
    - left + right are heap (using bubble up/down)
    - Cost: <= 2 * O(n)
#### STEP 2
- extract max for n times
- O(n log n)
#### Analysis
- O(n log n)
- In-place
- fast than merge sort
- always complete in n log n
- unstable

## Disjoint set
### Quick-find
- Array: componentID
- two objects are connected if they have the same componentID
- Integer[] for int
- Hashtable + open addressing for non-int
#### Code
```java
{
  find(int p, int q)
      return(componentId[p] == componentId[q]);

  union(int p, int q)
      updateComponent = componentId[q]
      for (int i=0; i<componentId.length; i++)
          if (componentId[i] == updateComponent)
              componentId[i] = componentId[p];
}
```
#### Analysis
- find:O(1)
- union: O(n)
- Flat trees

### Quick-union
- Array: Int[] parent
- Parent is its own if it is the root
- Two objects are connected if they are part of the same tree


#### Code
```java
{
  find(int p, int q)
      while (parent[p] != p) p = parent[p];
      while (parent[q] != q) q = parent[q];
      return (p == q);

  union(int p, int q)
      while (parent[p] != p) p = parent[p];
      while (parent[q] != q) q= parent[q];
      parent[p] = q;
}
```

#### Analysis
- find: O(n)
- union: O(n)

### Optimisation
#### Weighted Union
union(1,4) => which tree to make as the root?  the one with larger weight
```java
{
  union(int p, int q)
      while (parent[p] !=p) p = parent[p];
      while (parent[q] !=q) q = parent[q];
      if (size[p] > size[q] {
          parent[q] = p; // Link q to p
          size[p] = size[p] + size[q];
      }
      else {
          parent[p] = q; // Link p to q
          size[q] = size[p] + size[q];
      }
}
```
##### Analysis
> Maximum depth of tree
- O(logn)
- when T1 is merged with T2, depth increased only when size(T1+T2) > 2* size(T1)
- Running time
- find: O(logn)
- Union: O(logn)

#### Path compression
- After finding the root: set the parent of each traversed node
to the root.

```java
findRoot(int p) {
    root = p;
    while (parent[root] != root) root = parent[root];
    while (parent[p] != p) {
        temp = parent[p];
        parent[p] = root;
        p = temp;
    }
    return root;
}
```
##### Analysis
- find: O(logn)
- union: O(logn)

#### Weighted-union + path compression
Theorem:
Starting from empty, any sequence of m union/find operations on n objects takes:
O(n +mα(m,n)time.
- find : α(m,n)
- union: α(m,n)
